<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 5</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-5" epub:type="chapter">
    <h2 epub:type="title"><span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span><span epub:type="subtitle">Zaemon&rsquo;s Curse</span></h2>
    <p>
      It appeared that for the present at any rate I was to have my residence in
      the royal pyramid. The glittering cavalcade drew up in the great paved
      square which lies before the building, and massed itself in groups. The
      mammoth was halted before the doorway, and when a stair had been brought,
      the trumpets sounded, and we three who had ridden in the golden
      half-castle under the canopy of snakes, descended to the ground.
    </p>
    <p>
      It was plain that we were going from beneath the open sky to the
      apartments which lay inside the vast stone mazes of the pyramid, and
      without thinking, the instinct of custom and reverence that had become
      part of my nature caused me to turn to where the towering rocks of the
      Sacred Mountain frowned above the city, and make the usual obeisance, and
      offer up in silence the prescribed prayer. I say I did this thing
      unthinking, and as a matter of common custom, but when I rose to my feet,
      I could have sworn I heard a titter of laughter from somewhere in that
      fancifully bedecked crowd of onlookers.
    </p>
    <p>
      I glanced in the direction of the scoffers, frowningly enough, and then I
      turned to Phorenice to demand their prompt punishment for the disrespect.
      But here was a strange thing. I had looked to see her in the act and
      article of rising from an obeisance; but there she was, standing erect,
      and had clearly never touched her forehead to the ground. Moreover, she
      was regarding me with a queer look which I could not fathom.
    </p>
    <p>
      But whatever was in her mind, she had no plan to bawl about it then before
      the people collected in the square. She said to me, &ldquo;Come,&rdquo; and, turning
      to the doorway, cried for entrance, giving the secret word appointed for
      the day. The ponderous stone blocks, which barred the porch, swung back on
      their hinges, and with stately tread she passed out of the hot sunshine
      into the cool gloom beyond, with the fan-girl following decorously at her
      heels. With a heaviness beginning to grow at my heart, I too went inside
      the pyramid, and the stone doors, with a sullen thud, closed behind us.
    </p>
    <p>
      We did not go far just then. Phorenice halted in the hall of waiting. How
      well I remembered the place, with the pictures of kings on its red walls,
      and the burning fountain of earth-breath which blazed from a jet of bronze
      in the middle of the flooring and gave it light. The old King that was
      gone had come this far of his complaisance when he bade me farewell as I
      set out twenty years before for my vice-royalty in Yucatan. But the air of
      the hall was different to what it had been in those old days. Then it was
      pure and sweet. Now it was heavy with some scent, and I found it languid
      and oppressive.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;My minister,&rdquo; said the Empress, &ldquo;I acquit you of intentional insult; but
      I think the colonial air has made you a very simple man. Such an obeisance
      as you showed to that mountain not a minute since has not been made since
      I was sent to reign over this kingdom.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Your Majesty,&rdquo; I said, &ldquo;I am a member of the Priests&rsquo; Clan and was
      brought up in their tenets. I have been taught, before entering a house,
      to thank the Gods, and more especially our Lord the Sun, for the good air
      that He and They have provided. It has been my fate more than once to be
      chased by streams of fire and stinking air amongst the mountains during
      one of their sudden boils, and so I can say the prescribed prayer upon
      this matter straight from my heart.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Circumstances have changed since you left Atlantis,&rdquo; said Phorenice, &ldquo;and
      when thanks are given now, they are not thrown at those old Gods.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      I saw her meaning, and almost started at the impiety of it. If this was to
      be the new rule of things, I would have no hand in it. Fate might deal
      with me as it chose. To serve truly a reigning monarch, that I was
      prepared for; but to palter with sacrilege, and accept a swineherd&rsquo;s
      daughter as a God, who should receive prayers and obeisances, revolted my
      manhood. So I invited a crisis.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Phorenice,&rdquo; I said, &ldquo;I have been a priest from my childhood up, revering
      the Gods, and growing intimate with their mysteries. Till I find for
      myself that those old things are false, I must stand by that allegiance,
      and if there is a cost for this faithfulness I must pay it.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She looked at me with a slow smile. &ldquo;You are a strong man, Deucalion,&rdquo; she
      said.
    </p>
    <p>
      I bowed.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I have heard others as stubborn,&rdquo; she said, &ldquo;but they were converted.&rdquo;
       She shook out the ruddy bunches of her hair, and stood so that the light
      of the burning earth-breath might fall on the loveliness of her face and
      form. &ldquo;I have found it as easy to convert the stubborn as to burn them.
      Indeed, there has been little talk of burning. They have all rushed to
      conversion, whether I would or no. But it seems that my poor looks and
      tongue are wanting in charm to-day.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Phorenice is Empress,&rdquo; I said stolidly, &ldquo;and I am her servant. To-morrow,
      if she gives me leave, I will clear away this rabble which clamours
      outside the walls. I must begin to prove my uses.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I am told you are a pretty fighter,&rdquo; said she. &ldquo;Well, I hold some small
      skill in arms myself, and have a conceit that I am something of a judge.
      To-morrow we will take a taste of battle together. But to-day I must carry
      through the honourable reception I have planned for you, Deucalion. The
      feast will be set ready soon, and you will wish to make ready for the
      feast. There are chambers here selected for your use, and stored with what
      is needful. Ylga will show you their places.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      We waited, the fan-girl and I, till Phorenice had passed out of the glow
      of the light-jet, and had left the hall of waiting through a doorway
      amongst the shadows of its farther angle, and then (the girl taking a lamp
      and leading) we also threaded our way through the narrow mazes of the
      pyramid.
    </p>
    <p>
      Everywhere the air was full of perfumes, and everywhere the passages
      turned and twisted and doubled through the solid stone of the pyramid, so
      that strangers might have spent hours&mdash;yes, or days&mdash;in search
      before they came to the chamber they desired. There was a fine cunningness
      about those forgotten builders who set up this royal pyramid. They had no
      mind that kings should fall by the hand of vulgar assassins who might come
      in suddenly from outside. And it is said also that the king of the time,
      to make doubly sure, killed all that had built the pyramid, or seen even
      the lay of its inner stones.
    </p>
    <p>
      But the fan-girl led the way with the lamp swinging in her hand, as one
      accustomed to the mazes. Here she doubled, there she turned, and here she
      stopped in the middle of a blank wall to push a stone, which swung to let
      us pass. And once she pressed at the corner of a flagstone on the floor,
      which reared up to the thrust of her foot, and showed us a stair steep and
      narrow. That we descended, coming to the foot of an inclined way which led
      us upward again; and so by degrees we came unto the chamber which had been
      given for my use.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;There is raiment in all these chests which stand by the walls,&rdquo; said the
      girl, &ldquo;and jewels and gauds in that bronze coffer. They are Phorenice&rsquo;s
      first presents, she bid me say, and but a small earnest of what is to
      come. My Lord Deucalion can drop his simplicity now, and fig himself out
      in finery to suit the fashion.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Girl,&rdquo; I said sharply, &ldquo;be more decorous with your tongue, and spare me
      such small advice.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;If my Lord Deucalion thinks this a rudeness, he can give a word to
      Phorenice, and I shall be whipped. If he asks it, I can be stripped and
      scourged before him. The Empress will do much for Deucalion just now.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Girl,&rdquo; I said, &ldquo;you are nearer to that whipping than you think for.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I have got a name,&rdquo; she retorted, looking at me sullenly from under her
      black brows. &ldquo;They call me Ylga. You might have heard that as we rode here
      on the mammoth, had you not been so wrapped up in Phorenice.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      I gazed at her curiously. &ldquo;You have never seen me before,&rdquo; I said, &ldquo;and
      the first words you utter are those that might well bring trouble to
      yourself. There is some object in all this.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She went and pushed to the massive stone that swung in the doorway of the
      chamber. Then she put her little jewelled fingers on my garment and drew
      me carefully away from the airshaft into the farther corner. &ldquo;I am the
      daughter of Zaemon,&rdquo; she said, &ldquo;whom you knew.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You bring me some message from him?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;How could I? He lives in the priests&rsquo; dwellings on the Mountain you did
      obeisance to. I have not put eyes on him these two years. But when I saw
      you first step out from that red pavilion they had pitched at the harbour
      side, I&mdash;I felt a pity for you, Deucalion. I remembered you were my
      father&rsquo;s, Zaemon&rsquo;s, friend, and I knew what Phorenice had in store. She
      has been plotting it all these two months.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I cannot hear words against the Empress.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And yet&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She stamped her sandal upon the stone of the floor. &ldquo;You must be a very
      blind man, Deucalion, or a very daring one. But I shall not interfere
      further; at least not now. Still, I shall watch, and if at any time you
      seem to want a friend I will try and serve you.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I thank you for your friendship.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You seem to take it lightly enough. Why, sir, even now I do not believe
      you know my power, any more than you guess my motive. You may be first man
      in this kingdom, but let me tell you I rank as second lady. And remember,
      women stand high in Atlantis now. Believe me, my friendship is a commodity
      that has been sought with frequence and industry.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And as I say, I am grateful for it. You seem to think little enough of my
      gratitude, Ylga; but, credit me, I never have bestowed it on a woman
      before, and so you should treasure it for its rarity.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well,&rdquo; she said, &ldquo;my lord, there is an education before you.&rdquo; She left me
      then, showing me how to call slaves when I wished for their help, and for
      a full minute I stood wondering at the words I had spoken to her. Who was
      the daughter of Zaemon that she should induce me to change the habit of a
      lifetime?
    </p>
    <p>
      The slaves came at my bidding, and showed themselves anxious to deck me
      with a thousand foolishnesses in the matter of robes and gauds, and (what
      seemed to be the modern fashion of their class) holding out the virtues of
      a score of perfumes and unguents. Their manner irritated me. Clean I was
      already, and shaved; my hair was trim, and my robe was unsoiled; and,
      considering these pressing attentions of theirs something of an
      impertinence, I set them to beat one another as a punishment, promising
      that if they did not do it with thoroughness, I would hand them on to the
      brander to be marked with stripes which would endure. It is strange, but a
      common menial can often surpass even a rebellious general in power of
      ruffling one.
    </p>
    <p>
      I had seen many strange sights that day, and undergone many new
      sensations; but of all the things which came to my notice, Phorenice&rsquo;s
      manner of summoning the guests to her feast surprised me most. Nay, it did
      more; it shocked me profoundly; and I cannot say whether amazement at her
      profanity, or wonder at her power, was for the moment strongest in my
      breast. I sat in my chamber awaiting the summons, when gradually, growing
      out of nothing, a sound fell upon my ear which increased in volume with
      infinitely small graduations, till at last it became a clanging din which
      hurt the ear with its fierceness; and then (I guessed what was coming) the
      whole massive fabric of the pyramid trembled and groaned and shook, as
      though it had been merely a child&rsquo;s wooden toy brushed about by a strong
      man&rsquo;s sandal.
    </p>
    <p>
      It was the portent served out yearly by the chiefs of the Priests&rsquo; Clan on
      the Sacred Mountain, when they bade all the world take count of their
      sins. It was the sacred reminder that from roaring, raging fire, and from
      the agony of monstrous earth-tremors, man had been born, and that by these
      same agencies he would eventually be swallowed up&mdash;he and the sins
      within his breast. And here the Empress was prostituting its solemnities
      into a mere call to gluttony, and sign for ribald laughter and sensuous
      display.
    </p>
    <p>
      But how had she acquired the authority to do this thing? Who was she that
      she should tamper with those dimly understood powers, the forces that
      dwell within the liquid heart of our mother earth? Had there been
      treachery? Had some member of the Priests&rsquo; Clan forgotten his sacred vows,
      and babbled to this woman matters concerning the holy mysteries? Or had
      Phorenice discovered a key to these mysteries with her own agile brain?
    </p>
    <p>
      If that last was the case, I could continue to serve her with silent
      conscience. Though she might be none of my making, at least she was
      Empress, and it was my duty to give her obedience. But if she had suborned
      some weaker member of the Clan on the Sacred Mount, that would be a
      different matter. For be it remembered that it was one of the elements of
      our constitution to preserve our secrets and mysteries inviolate, and to
      pursue with undying hatred both the man who had dared to betray them, and
      the unhappy recipient of his confidence.
    </p>
    <p>
      It was with very undecided feelings, then, that I obeyed the summons of
      the earth-shaking, and bade the slaves lead me through the windings of the
      pyramid to the great banqueting-hall. The scene there was dazzling. The
      majestic chamber with its marvellous carvings was filled with a company
      decked out with all the gauds and colours that fancy could conceive.
      Little recked they of the solemn portent which had summoned them to the
      meal, of the death and misery that stalked openly through the city wards
      without, of the rebels which lay in leaguer beyond the walls, of the
      neglected Gods and their clan of priests on the Sacred Mountain. They were
      all gluttonous for the passions of the moment; it was their fashion and
      conceit to look at nothing beyond.
    </p>
    <p>
      Flaming jets of earth-breath lit the great hall to the brightness of
      midday; and when I stepped out upon the pavement, trumpets blared, so that
      all might know of my coming. But there was no roar of welcome.
      &ldquo;Deucalion,&rdquo; they lisped with mincing voices, bowing themselves
      ridiculously to the ground so that all their ornaments and silks might
      jangle and swish. Indeed, when Phorenice herself appeared, and all sent up
      their cries and made lawful obeisance, there was the same artificiality in
      the welcome. They meant well enough, it is true; but this was the new
      fashion. Heartiness had come to be accounted a barbarism by this new
      culture.
    </p>
    <p>
      A pair of posturing, smirking chamberlains took me in charge, and ushered
      me with their flimsy golden wands to the dais at the farther end. It
      appeared that I was to sit on Phorenice&rsquo;s divan, and eat my meat out of
      her dish.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;There is no stint to the honour the Empress puts upon me,&rdquo; I said, as I
      knelt down and took my seat.
    </p>
    <p>
      She gave me one of her queer, sidelong looks. &ldquo;Deucalion may have more
      beside, if he asks for it prettily. He may have what all the other men in
      the known world have sighed for, and what none of them will ever get. But
      I have given enough of my own accord; he must ask me warmly for those
      further favours.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I ask,&rdquo; I said, &ldquo;first, that I may sweep the boundaries clear of this
      rabble which is clamouring against the city walls.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Pah,&rdquo; she said, and frowned. &ldquo;Have you appetite only for the sterner
      pleasures of life? My good Deucalion, they must have been rustic folk in
      that colony of yours. Well, you shall give me news now of the
      toothsomeness of this feast.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Dishes and goblets were placed before us, and we began to eat, though I
      had little enough appetite for victual so broken and so highly spiced. But
      if this finicking cookery and these luscious wines did not appeal to me,
      the other diners in that gorgeous hall appreciated it all to the full.
      They sat about in groups on the pavement beneath the light-jets like a
      tangle of rainbows for colour, and according to the new custom they went
      into raptures and ecstasies over their enjoyment. Women and men both, they
      lingered over each titillation of the palate as though it were a caress of
      the Gods.
    </p>
    <p>
      Phorenice, with her quick, bright eyes, looked on, and occasionally flung
      one or another a few words between her talk with me, and now and again
      called some favoured creature up to receive a scrap of viand from the
      royal dish. This the honoured one would eat with extravagant gesture, or
      (as happened twice) would put it away in the folds of his clothes as a
      treasure too dear to be profaned by human lips.
    </p>
    <p>
      To me, this flattery appeared gross and disgustful, but Phorenice, through
      use, perhaps, seemed to take it as merely her due. There was, one had to
      suppose, a weakness in her somewhere, though truly to the outward seeing
      none was apparent. Her face was strong enough, and it was subtle also,
      and, moreover, it was wondrous comely. All the courtiers in the
      banqueting-hall raved about Phorenice&rsquo;s face and the other beauties of her
      body and limbs, and though not given to appreciation in these matters, I
      could not but see that here at least they had a groundwork for their
      admiration, for surely the Gods have never favoured mortal woman more
      highly. Yet lovely though she might be, for myself I preferred to look
      upon Ylga, the girl, who, because of her rank, was privileged to sit on
      the divan behind us as immediate attendant. There was an honesty in Ylga&rsquo;s
      face which Phorenice&rsquo;s lacked.
    </p>
    <p>
      They did not eat to nutrify their bodies, these feasters in the
      banqueting-hall of the royal pyramid, but they all ate to cloy themselves,
      and they strutted forth new usages with every platter and bowl that the
      slaves brought. To me some of their manners were closely touching on
      disrespect. At the halfway of the meal, a gorgeous popinjay&mdash;he was a
      governor of an out-province driven into the capital by a rebellion in his
      own lands&mdash;this gorgeous fop, I say, walked up between the groups of
      feasters with flushed face and unsteady gait, and did obeisance before the
      divan. &ldquo;Most astounding Empress,&rdquo; cried he, &ldquo;fairest among the Goddesses,
      Queen regnant of my adoring heart, hail!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Phorenice with a smile stretched him out her cup. I looked to see him pour
      respectful libation, but no such thing. He set the drink to his lips and
      drained it to the final drop. &ldquo;May all your troubles,&rdquo; he cried, &ldquo;pass
      from you as easily, and leave as pleasant a flavour.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The Empress turned to me with one of her quick looks. &ldquo;You do not like
      this new habit?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      To which I replied bluntly enough that to pour out liquor at a person&rsquo;s
      feet had grown through custom to be a mark of respect, but that drinking
      it seemed to me mere self-indulgence, which might be practised anywhere.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You still keep to the old austere teachings,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;Our newer code
      bids us enjoy life first, and order other things so as not to meddle with
      our more immediate pleasure.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      And so the feast went on, the guests practising their gluttonies and their
      absurdities, and the guards standing to their arms round the circuit of
      the walls as motionless and as stern as the statues carven in the white
      stone beyond them. But a term was put to the orgy with something of
      suddenness. There was a stir at the farther doorway of the
      banqueting-hall, and a clash, as two of the guards joined their spears
      across the entrance. But the man they tried to stop&mdash;or perhaps it
      was to pin&mdash;passed them unharmed, and walked up over the pavement
      between the lights, and the groups of feasters. All looked round at him; a
      few threw him ribald words; but none ventured to stop his progress. A few,
      women chiefly, I could see, shuddered as he passed them by, as though a
      wintry chill had come over them; and in the end he walked up and stood in
      front of Phorenice&rsquo;s divan, and gazed fixedly on her, but without making
      obeisance.
    </p>
    <p>
      He was a frail old man, with white hair tumbling on his shoulders, and
      ragged white beard. The mud of wayfaring hung in clots on his feet and
      legs. His wizened body was bare save for a single cloth wound about his
      shoulders and his loins, and he carried in his hand a wand with the symbol
      of our Lord the Sun glowing at its tip. That wand went to show his caste,
      but in no other way could I recognize him.
    </p>
    <p>
      I took him for one of those ascetics of the Priests&rsquo; Clan, who had
      forsworn the steady nurtured life of the Sacred Mountain, and who lived
      out in the dangerous lands amongst the burning hills, where there is daily
      peril from falling rocks, from fire streams, from evil vapours, from
      sudden fissuring of the ground, and from other movements of those unstable
      territories, and from the greater lizards and other monstrous beasts which
      haunt them. These keep constant in the memory the might of the Holy Gods,
      and the insecurity of this frail earth on which we have our resting-place,
      and so the sojourners there become chastened in the spirit, and gain power
      over mysteries which even the most studious and learned of other men can
      never hope to attain.
    </p>
    <p>
      A silence filled the room when the old man came to his halt, and Phorenice
      was the first to break it. &ldquo;Those two guards,&rdquo; she said, in her clear,
      carrying voice, &ldquo;who held the door, are not equal to their work. I cannot
      have imperfect servants; remove them.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The soldiers next in the rank lifted their spears and drove them home, and
      the two fellows who had admitted the old man fell to the ground. One
      shrieked once, the other gave no sound: they were clever thrusts both.
    </p>
    <p>
      The old man found his voice, thin, and high, and broken. &ldquo;Another crime
      added to your tally, Phorenice. Not half your army could have hindered my
      entrance had I wished to come, and let me tell you that I am here to bring
      you your last warning. The Gods have shown you much favour; they gave you
      merit by which you could rise above your fellows, till at last only the
      throne stood above you. It was seen good by those on the Sacred Mountain
      to let you have this last ambition, and sit on this throne that has as
      long and honourably been filled by the ancient kings of Atlantis.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The Empress sat back on the divan smiling. &ldquo;I seemed to get these things
      as I chose, and in spite of your friends&rsquo; teeth. I may owe to you, old
      man, a small parcel of thanks, though that I offered to repay; but for my
      lords the priests, their permission was of small enough value when it
      came. I would have you remember that I was as firm on the throne of
      Atlantis as this pyramid stands upon its base when your worn-out priests
      came up to give their tottering benediction.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The old man waved aside her interruption. &ldquo;Hear me out,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;I am
      here with no trivial message. There is nothing paltry about the threat I
      can throw at you, Phorenice. With your fire-tubes, your handling of
      troops, and your other fiendish clevernesses, you may not be easy to
      overthrow by mere human means, though, forsooth, these poor rebels who yap
      against your city walls have contrived to hold their ground for long
      enough now. It may be that you are becoming enervated; I do not know. It
      may be that you are too wrapped up in your feastings, your dressings, your
      pomps, and your debaucheries, to find leisure to turn to the art of war.
      It may be that the man&rsquo;s spirit has gone out from your arm and brain, and
      you are a woman once more&mdash;weak, and pleasure-loving; again I do not
      know.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But this must happen: You must undo the evil you have done; you must give
      bread to the people who are starving, even if you take it from these
      gluttons in this hall; you must restore Atlantis to the state in which it
      was entrusted to you: or else you must be removed. It cannot be permitted
      that the country should sink back into the lawlessness and barbarism from
      which its ancient kings have digged it. You hear, Phorenice. Now give me
      true answer.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Speak him fair. Oh! For the sake of your fortune, speak him fair,&rdquo; came
      Ylga&rsquo;s voice in a hurried whisper from behind us. But the Empress took no
      notice of it. She leaned forward on the cushions of the divan with a knit
      brow.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Do you dare to threaten me, old man, knowing what I am?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I know your origin,&rdquo; he said gravely, &ldquo;as well as you know it yourself.
      As for my daring, that is a small matter. He need be but a timid man who
      dares to say words that the High Gods put on his lips.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I shall rule this kingdom as I choose. I shall brook interference from no
      creature on this earth, or beneath it, or in the sky above. The Gods have
      chosen me to be Their regent in Atlantis, and They do not depose me
      through such creatures as you. Go away, old man, and play the fanatic in
      another court. It is well that I have an ancient kindliness for you, or
      you would not leave this place unharmed.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Now, indeed, you are lost,&rdquo; I heard Ylga murmur from behind, and the old
      man in front of us did not move a step. Instead, he lifted up the Symbol
      of our Lord the Sun, and launched his curse. &ldquo;Your blasphemy gives the
      reply I asked for. Hear me now make declaration of war on behalf of Those
      against whom you have thrown your insults. You shall be overthrown and
      sent to the nether Gods. At whatever cost the land shall be purged of you
      and yours, and all the evil that has been done to it whilst you have
      sullied the throne of its ancient kings. You will not amend, neither will
      you yield tamely. You vaunt that you sit as firm on your throne as this
      pyramid reposes on its base. See how little you know of what the future
      carries. I say to you that, whilst you are yet Empress, you shall see this
      royal pyramid which you have polluted with your debaucheries torn tier
      from tier, and stone from stone, and scattered as feathers spread before a
      wind.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You may wreck the pyramid,&rdquo; said Phorenice contemptuously. &ldquo;I myself have
      some knowledge of the earth forces, as I have shown this night. But though
      you crumble every stone above us now and grind it into grit and dust, I
      shall still be Empress. What force can you crazy priests bring against me
      that I cannot throw back and destroy?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;We have a weapon that was forged in no mortal smithy,&rdquo; shrilled the old
      man, &ldquo;whereof the key is now lodged in the Ark of the Mysteries. But that
      weapon can be used only as a last resource. The nature of it even is too
      awful to be told in words. Our other powers will be launched against you
      first, and for this poor country&rsquo;s sake I pray that they may cause you to
      wince. Yet rest assured, Phorenice, that we shall not step aside once we
      have put a hand to this matter. We shall carry it through, even though the
      cost be a universal burning and destruction. For know this, daughter of
      the swineherd, it is agreed amongst the most High Gods that you are too
      full of sin to continue unchecked.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Speak him fairly,&rdquo; Ylga urged from behind. &ldquo;He has a power at which you
      cannot even guess.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The Empress made to rise, but Ylga clung to her skirt. &ldquo;For the sake of
      your fame,&rdquo; she urged, &ldquo;for the sake of your life, do not defy him.&rdquo; But
      Phorenice struck her fiercely aside, and faced the old man in a tumult of
      passion. &ldquo;You dare call me a blasphemer, who blaspheme yourself? You dare
      cast slurs upon my birth, who am come direct from the most high Heaven?
      Old man, your craziness protects you in part, but not in all. You shall be
      whipped. Do you hear me? I say, whipped. The lean flesh shall be scourged
      from your scraggy bones, and you shall totter away from this place as a
      red and bleeding example for those who would dare traduce their Empress.
      Here, some of you, I say, take that man, and let him be whipped where he
      stands.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Her cry went out clearly enough. But not a soul amongst those glittering
      feasters stirred in his place. Not a soldier amongst the guards stepped
      from his rank. The place was hung in a terrible silence. It seemed as
      though no one within the hall dared so much as to draw a breath. All felt
      that the very air was big with fate.
    </p>
    <p>
      Phorenice, with her head crouched forward, looked from one group to
      another. Her face was working. &ldquo;Have I no true servants,&rdquo; she asked,
      &ldquo;amongst all you pretty lip-servers?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Still no one moved. They stood, or sat, or crouched like people
      fascinated. For myself, with the first words he had uttered, I had
      recognized the old man by his voice. It was Zaemon, the weak governor who
      had given the Empress her first step towards power; that earnest searcher
      into the mysteries, who knew more of their powers, and more about the
      hidden forces, than any other dweller on the Sacred Mountain, even at that
      time when I left for my colony. And now, during his strange hermit life,
      how much more might he not have learned? I was torn by warring duties. I
      owed much to the Priests&rsquo; Clan, by reason of my oath and membership; it
      seemed I owed no less to Phorenice. And, again, was Zaemon the truly
      accredited envoy of the high council of the priests of the Sacred
      Mountain? And was the Empress of a truth deposed by the High Gods above,
      or was she still Empress, and still the commander of my duty? I could not
      tell, and so I sat in my seat awaiting what the event would sow.
    </p>
    <p>
      Phorenice&rsquo;s fury was growing. &ldquo;Do I stand alone here?&rdquo; she cried. &ldquo;Have I
      pampered you creatures out of all touch with gratitude? It seems that at
      last I want a new chief to my guards. Ho! Who will be chief of the guards
      of the Empress?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      There was a shifting of eyes, a hesitation. Then a great burly form strode
      up from the farther end of the hall, and a perceptible shudder went up
      from all the others as they watched him.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;So, Tarca, you prefer to take the risks, and remain chief of the guard
      yourself?&rdquo; she said with an angry scoff. &ldquo;Truly there did not seem to be
      many thrusting forward to strip you of the office. I shall have a fine
      sorting up of places in payment for this night&rsquo;s work. But for the
      present, Tarca, do your duty.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The man came up, obviously timorous. He was a solidly made fellow, but not
      altogether unmartial, and though but little of his cheek showed above his
      decorated beard, I could see that he paled as he came near to the priest.
      &ldquo;My lord,&rdquo; he said quietly, &ldquo;I must ask you to come with me.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Stand aside,&rdquo; said the old man, thrusting out the Symbol in front of him.
      I could see his eyes gather on the soldier and his brows knit with a
      strain of will.
    </p>
    <p>
      Tarca saw this too, and I thought he would have fallen, but with an effort
      he kept his manhood, and doggedly repeated his summons. &ldquo;I must obey the
      command of my mistress, and I would have you remember, my lord, that I am
      but a servant. You must come with me to the whip.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I warn you!&rdquo; cried the old man. &ldquo;Stand from out of my path, you!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      It must have been with the courage of desperation that the soldier dared
      to use force. But the hand he stretched out dropped limply back to his
      side the moment it touched the old man&rsquo;s bare shoulder, as though it had
      been struck by some shock. He seemed almost to have expected some such
      repulse; yet when he picked up that hand with the other, and looked at it,
      and saw its whiteness, he let out of him a yell like a wounded beast. &ldquo;Oh,
      Gods!&rdquo; he cried. &ldquo;Not that. Spare me!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      But Zaemon was glowering at him still. A twitching seized the man&rsquo;s face,
      and he put up his sound hand to it and plucked at his beard, which was
      curled and plaited after the new fashion of the day. A woman standing near
      screamed as the half of the beard came off in his fingers. Beneath was
      silver whiteness over half his face. Zaemon had smitten him with a sudden
      leprosy that was past cure.
    </p>
    <p>
      Yet the punishment was not ended even then. Other twitchings took him on
      other parts of the body, and he tore off his armour and his foppish
      clothes, and always where the bare flesh showed, there had the horrid
      plague written its white mark; and in the end, being able to endure no
      more, the man fell to the pavement and lay there writhing.
    </p>
    <p>
      Zaemon said no further word. He lifted the Symbol before him, set his eyes
      on the farther door of the banqueting-hall and walked for it directly, all
      those in his path shrinking away from him with open shudders. And through
      the valves of the door he passed out of our sight, still wordless, still
      unchecked.
    </p>
    <p>
      I glanced up at Phorenice. The loveliness of her face was drawn and
      haggard. It was the first great reverse, this, she had met with in all her
      life, and the shock of it, and the vision of what might follow after,
      dazed her. Alas, if she could only have guessed at a tenth of the terrors
      which the future had in its womb, Atlantis might have been saved even
      then.
    </p>


</section></body></html>
